---
layout: post
language: en
categories:
    - journalism
    - coding
title: Mozilla + Journalism
---

The "Knight Foundation":http://www.knightfoundation.org/ has really been stepping things up a notch lately. I'm probably not the only one who's been "sceptical about some of the digital projects they've funded":http://danielbachhuber.com/2011/04/17/preliminary-knight-news-challenge-survey-results/ and it seems Knight has heard the message and is trying out some experiments beyond their "News Challenge":http://www.newschallenge.org/, in particular the "Knight Mozilla News Technology Partnership":https://drumbeat.org/en-US/journalism/.

The first step in the Mozilla + Journalism program are three news challenges, one about digital video, one about online comments and one about dreaming up a news app that can change journalism. People who prove themselves in the challenges may become the next Knight-Mozilla fellows: technologists placed in prestigious newsrooms around the globe.

I have a job, so I'm not particularly interested in becoming a fellow, but there's nothing to hone the mind like a good old-fashioned competition. Thing is, submissions have been open for a couple of days now, and nobody has submitted anything as of yet.

https://drumbeat.org/en-US/challenges/open-webs-killer-app/full

Mozilla wants to reach right into the core of journalistic endeavors, but doesn't care about "interface tweaks", i.e. new ways of reading the news. Reach into the core, yes, but at the same time they'd prefer you not to build any back-end tools. The kind of apps they want seem to depend on the help of a framework like Django, yet you're supposed to use only web-native technologies like HTML and client-side Javascript.